JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight,
following President Trump's
address to Congress,
a look at the road ahead for the
administration's
agenda.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Wednesday:
buying a ticket to the moon --
SpaceX's ambitious
plan to fly two tourists on a
private journey
to outer space.
JUDY WOODRUFF: and Baltimore's
mission to
keep residents alive during a
rise in heroin
overdoses sparks debate over the
best way
to address addiction.
DR.
LEANA WEN, Baltimore Health
Commissioner:
We are just treading water if
all we're doing
is saving someone's life right
now.
We also know that we have to get
them the
second part, which is access to
long-term
treatments.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
is looking
to move ahead, in the wake of
his address
to Congress.
He won praise today from
Republicans, while
Democrats warned that his more
moderate sound
belies his real intentions.
Wall Street's reaction to the
president's
business-friendly tone was
euphoric.
The Dow Jones industrial average
shot up 300
points to close above 21000 for
the first
time.
The Nasdaq rose 78 points, and
the S&P 500
added 32.
We will take a closer look at
what the president
said and what comes next after
the news summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There's word
the president's
revised travel ban will no
longer include
citizens from Iraq.
It had been one of seven nations
included
in the initial ban that's still
tied up in
federal court.
The Associated Press also
reports Syrian refugees
will no longer be barred
indefinitely under
the revised order.
And it drops any explicit
exception for Christian
and other religious minorities
in Muslim nations.
The White House now says the new
order will
come in the next few days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tornadoes ripped
across part
of the Midwest last night,
killing three people
and damaging more than 100
homes.
The National Weather Service
says it had reports
of more than 20 twisters.
Some of the worst damage came in
Illinois
and Missouri.
This morning, Illinois Governor
Bruce Rauner
surveyed extensive damage in the
town of Ottawa.
GOV.
BRUCE RAUNER (R), Illinois: We
got to count
our blessings.
This could have been way worse.
The warnings systems worked
well.
People were notified.
And it's wonderful the way the
residents in
the community helped each other.
They got to elderly residents,
gave them a
warning that tornadoes were
coming.
People got into their basements.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Forecasters say
about 95 million
people are in the path of the
same storm system
as it moves east.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile, a
staggering
statistic out of Chicago: The
Windy City had
no measurable snow during
January and February
for the first time in 146 years,
while, in
California, there's been so much
snow, that
a five-year-long drought may
finally be over.
Crews already measured the
state's snowpack
once, and did so again today,
after one of
California's wettest winters on
record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Afghanistan,
twin Taliban
bombings, and a lengthy
shoot-out, killed
at least 16 people in the
capital, Kabul.
More than 100 others were
wounded.
In the first attack, a suicide
car bomber
targeted a police station,
touching off a
gun battle that lasted hours.
Later, an attacker on foot blew
himself up
outside the Afghan intelligence
service.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The United
States today
delivered a sharp rebuke to the
U.N. Human
Rights Council over Israel.
Washington has long argued the
47-nation body
unjustly focuses on Israel's
treatment of
Palestinians.
In Geneva today, U.S. envoy Erin
Barclay said
the council has -- quote -- "an
obsession
with Israel" that undermines the
group's credibility.
ERIN BARCLAY, U.S. Deputy
Secretary of State
Assistant: The United States
will oppose any
effort to delegitimize or
isolate Israel,
not just in the HRC, but
wherever it occurs.
When it comes to human rights,
no country
should be free from scrutiny,
but neither
should any democratic country be
regularly
subjected to unfair, unbalanced
and unfounded
bias.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The critique
comes amid
reports the Trump administration
is considering
quitting the council altogether.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, the U.S.
Senate easily confirmed Montana
Congressman
Ryan Zinke as secretary of the
interior.
The 55-year-old Republican and
former Navy
SEAL has pledged to revitalize
the country's
national parks.
He has also said he will resist
efforts to
sell or transfer federal lands.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And Danish
toymaker LEGO
has announced plans for a new
set honoring
five women who were pioneers at
NASA.
The collection will feature
computer scientist
Margaret Hamilton, mathematician
Katherine
Johnson of "Hidden Figures"
fame, astronauts
Sally Ride and Mae Jemison, and
astronomer
Nancy Grace Roman.
The set will be released later
this year or
early 2018.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
President
Trump lays out his vision for
the country
-- now, what policies will take
priority?;
a closer look at the
decision-making before
the deadly raid in Yemen;
Baltimore's approach
to battling the growing opioid
epidemic; and
much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We take a longer
look now at
President Trump's speech last
night.
He promised action on a long
list of priorities,
including Obamacare, the border
wall, public
works and regulatory reform.
And all of it, he did in a more
disciplined,
upbeat way than before.
Lisa Desjardins reports on the
day after.
LISA DESJARDINS: The president
called in Republican
leaders for a White House lunch,
hoping to
build on momentum from last
night's address.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
It begins as of now, and we
think we're going
to have tremendous success.
LISA DESJARDINS: Vice President
Pence took
that theme on a one-man media
blitz, with
11 interviews on his public
schedule.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
What the American people saw
last night is
the president that I serve with
every day:
broad shoulders, big heart,
reaching out,
focusing on the future.
LISA DESJARDINS: Praise came
from top Republicans
in Congress as well.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: The
president made clear last night
he's ready
to work with Congress on
policies that can
actually move us forward.
He will find many partners in
Congress excited
to get those things
accomplished.
LISA DESJARDINS: High on that
list, repealing
and replacing Obamacare.
Texas Senator Ted Cruz, a former
Republican
primary rival, lauded Mr. Trump
for his broad
outline.
SEN.
TED CRUZ (R), Texas: The
principles he's focused
on are exactly the right
principles: more
choice, more competition, lower
costs, lower
premiums.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Democrats
say there was
no real substance, and they
accuse the president
of misleading the public with
statements like
this:
DONALD TRUMP: Obamacare premiums
nationwide
have increased by double and
triple digits.
As an example, Arizona went up
116 percent
last year alone.
LISA DESJARDINS: In fact, while
it's true
Arizona's premiums have gone up
by that amount,
the president ignored important
context, that
Arizona is an outlier, with
increases four
times the national average.
On immigration, some Republicans
say they're
encouraged by Mr. Trump's
comments ahead of
his speech that he'd consider a
legal status
for some undocumented
immigrants.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: He's showing
some willingness to embrace a
more practical
immigration proposal.
I want to give him credit for
that.
Any time he moves into the land
of practicality,
I want to encourage him, because
that's what
it's going to take to get a bill
passed.
LISA DESJARDINS: But in the
actual speech,
there was no mention of
legalizing undocumented
immigrants.
Instead, the president spoke of
crimes by
immigrants and his plan to crack
down on the
undocumented.
DONALD TRUMP: By finally
enforcing our immigration
laws, we will raise wages, help
the unemployed,
save billions and billions of
dollars, and
make our communities safer for
everyone.
LISA DESJARDINS: That claim,
too, was challenged.
Democratic Congressman Keith
Ellison of Minnesota
spoke with the "NewsHour" last
night.
REP.
KEITH ELLISON (D), Minnesota:
This speech
seems to blame undocumented
immigrants for
a crime.
It indicated that clamping down
on immigration
was actually going to increase
wages and make
our economy better.
The fact is, there's no facts
that support
that.
LISA DESJARDINS: Several of the
presidents
statements were declared
inaccurate by fact-checkers
today.
Also getting attention, the
generally positive
tone of the speech.
DONALD TRUMP: Democrats and
Republicans should
get together and unite for the
good of our
country and for the good of the
American people.
(APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: But Democratic
leaders say
it's all a facade.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: You
can't just talk the talk, Mr.
President.
You have to walk the walk.
And on issue after issue after
issue, we haven't
seen anything, or negative
things, for the
working class.
LISA DESJARDINS: The president
and Congress
both soon will see pressure for
action increase
soon.
House Republicans have said they
want a draft
health care bill by the end of
this month.
At that point, Trump will be
just one month
away from the end of his first
100 days.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last night's
presidential address
relayed an ambitious agenda.
But how much of it will take
shape, and does
President Trump have enough
support on Capitol
Hill to find success?
Joining me to discuss all of
that are Dan
Balz of The Washington Post and
NPR congressional
reporter Susan Davis.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Dan, I'm going to start with
you.
We just heard Lisa Desjardins
talk about this
was a different tone coming from
the president.
You wrote about that today in
The Washington
Post.
It was a change from what we
have been hearing.
DAN BALZ, Chief Political
Reporter, The Washington
Post: It was a dramatic change
from what we
have been hearing.
And I looked back to the
inaugural address,
which was described by so many
people as dark
or dystopian, the phrase
American carnage
being one that leaped out at
people and has
stayed with people, a very
downbeat view of
things in the state of the
nation, the state
of the world.
The substance of last night
wasn't significantly
or materially different from
what he's talked
about all through the campaign
and in his
inaugural address, but the tone
was so much
different.
He talked about unity
repeatedly.
He talked about cooperating with
Democrats.
He talked about a spirit of
American renewal.
And it was -- it was a speech
that was certainly
aimed at reassuring his
congressional Republican
allies that he will be
presidential, if you
will, going forward, that he
will be serious
about trying to get these things
done, and
that he will not be seeking to
create diversion
and digression and
controversies.
Whether he's able to stay with
that, we don't
know.
I mean, this was only one
speech, and we know
the history of Donald Trump is
that there
are moments when he -- you know,
he goes in
directions that even his staff
doesn't want.
But for that hour in the House
chamber last
night, he was the Donald Trump
that a lot
of elected officials have wanted
to see for
a long time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Sue Davis,
it was a confident-sounding
speech, as if he expects these
things to happen.
How much of what he's done and
what he said
he's going to do so far is
actually taking
effect?
SUSAN DAVIS, NPR: Well, let's
start with the
two top priorities for Congress
that we know,
health care and taxes.
And his remarks in the speech
last night,
it's like they could have been
written by
House Speaker Paul Ryan.
And the speaker's office has
been saying,
there's no daylight between us.
There's no daylight between us.
But the president is fairly
erratic.
He has tweeted different things
on positions
at different times that have
contradicted
the speaker.
And they saw the speech as
incredibly reassuring,
as Dan said, not only that
they're on the
same page, but that the
president is capable
of using the moment to show
leadership to
sort of build the case for these
conservative
ideas.
Republicans say health care is
on track.
They expect to see a bill within
weeks, not
months.
And they saw the president's
speech last night
as an almost tacit endorsement
of this plan
that's emerging from the House.
The fight that's going to be
really interesting
is that there is a group of
conservatives
in the Senate, namely Rand Paul
of Kentucky,
Ted Cruz of Texas, and Mike Lee
of Utah, who
are -- could be an immovable
force on this,
who say it is not conservative
enough.
And we're going to see this
really interesting
test of conservatism and the
conservatives
that bedeviled past leaders in
Congress and
Donald Trump, and who is going
to win out
this fight.
And I talked to Rand Paul today,
and he said,
what has emerged from the House,
he will not
vote for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Dan Balz, to
what extent
is the White House prepared for
that kind
of pushback from people in their
own party?
DAN BALZ: Well, I think they are
prepared.
I think they know it's there.
They have been getting pushback
for some time.
There is not only opposition
from conservatives
on Capitol Hill.
There is division among the
Republican governors
-- put aside the Democratic
governors -- over
what to do with Medicaid.
If you were a state that
expanded Medicaid,
you have got one view of that.
And if you didn't, you have got
another view
of that.
There are divisions.
I think the administration today
feels that,
as a result of the speech,
people who have
been reticent to support him or
openly hostile
to what is taking shape in the
House might
be a little more amenable to
working with
the administration.
Secretary Price from HHS and the
vice president,
Mike Pence, are going to be the
point people
from the administration.
I think one question is to what
extent the
administration will, in fact,
put down a proposal
and move toward Congress or wait
for Congress
to really do it and then come in
at the end.
I think Congress would like the
president
to lead as effectively as he
can, in part,
I think, to try to create the
consensus that
doesn't exist today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then, Sue
Davis, there's
immigration, where -- I happened
to be at
a lunch with the president
yesterday where
he was talking about he liked
want idea of
an immigration bill, if he could
get the two
sides to compromise.
He didn't talk very much about
comprehensive
immigration reform last night.
He talked about the wall.
And we know there's that travel
ban, renewed
version of that.
But what is the mood?
What are the attitudes on the
Hill about immigration?
SUSAN DAVIS: Well, here's what
we know is
going to happen.
In a couple of weeks, he's going
to send a
request to Congress asking for
undetermined
amounts of millions of dollars
to start building
that wall.
But immigration -- comprehensive
immigration
reform hasn't really been part
of the conversation
on the Hill.
It wasn't part of the agenda
outlined by Senate
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell
and Speaker
Ryan at the beginning of the
Congress.
I talked to the speaker's office
today that
said it's still not necessarily
at the top
of the agenda.
But if the president decides
that he wants
this to be a priority, he has
tremendous power
to make it a priority and upend
what the congressional
schedule is.
I think, on that issue, where I
think Congress
is trying to take the lead on
things like
health care and taxes, on
immigration, I think
they'd like to see the White
House be a little
bit more assertive and outline
specifically
what the president would like to
do, specifically
because that issue was such a
core, center
point of his campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just finally to
the two of
you -- and I hate to ask you to
do this quickly
-- but, Dan Balz, the president
really mentioned
tax reform only briefly last
night, taxes
at all.
What does it look -- what does
the atmosphere
look like?
What are the realities in terms
of getting
tax reform done this year?
DAN BALZ: Well, it will be very
challenging.
Just simply getting the health
care bill through
will be potentially a year-long
effort, as
we saw in the Obama
administration.
On taxes, they don't have a plan
at this point.
And health care will have to go
first.
Taxes will have to follow.
There are questions about what
he really wants
to do.
He provided no details of that
last night.
He provided some principles on
health care
at least.
On tax reform and tax
legislation, he offered
nothing of substance beyond kind
of a generalized
notion of what he wants.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you pick up
anything on
that, Sue?
SUSAN DAVIS: I see the fates of
health care
and taxes linked.
If the repeal and replace effort
falls apart,
I think tax reform falls apart.
If repeal and replace, if
they're able to
get something to the president's
desk, I think
that that increase the chances
that they can
actually move on taxes this
year.
I don't think they can be seen
as separate
tracks.
I think they have to move
together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it is an
ambitious agenda.
SUSAN DAVIS: Extremely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're talking
health care.
We're talking -- and we didn't
even mention
infrastructure, which is
something the president
has said he wants to get done
too.
But we're going to leave it
there for now.
We thank both of you for talking
to us, Dan
Balz of The Washington Post,
Susan Davis of
NPR.
We thank you.
SUSAN DAVIS: Thank you.
DAN BALZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More than a month
after a controversial
special operations raid was
launched on a
moonless night in Yemen,
questions persist
about how that mission was
authorized, what
it accomplished, and how it's
been explained
by the White House and by the
president.
Margaret Warner begins our
coverage.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Ryan's legacy is etched into
eternity.
MARGARET WARNER: Democrats and
Republicans
alike rose to their feet last
night the widow
of Navy SEAL Ryan Owens, who was
killed during
a January raid in Yemen.
DONALD TRUMP: Ryan died as he
lived, a warrior
and a hero, battling against
terrorism and
securing our nation.
MARGARET WARNER: The Trump White
House says
the raid was planned by the
Pentagon during
the Obama administration, and
President Trump
gave the go-ahead during his
first week in
office.
The Pentagon intended as an
intelligence-gathering
mission against al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula,
one of the militant group's most
feared branches.
But a gun battle erupted, and
Owens was killed,
reportedly along with as many as
30 civilians,
including children.
Last night, the president said
Defense Secretary
Mattis told him the mission
would lead to
victories in the future.
DONALD TRUMP: Ryan was a part of
a highly
successful raid that generated
large amounts
of vital intelligence.
MARGARET WARNER: But others
question that
claim, and last month,
Republican Senator
John McCain suggested the raid
was a failure.
Mr. Trump respond by charging
such criticism
only emboldened the enemy, and
White House
spokesman Sean Spicer joined in.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
I think anybody who undermines
the success
of that raid owes an apology and
does a disservice
to the life of Chief Owens.
MARGARET WARNER: The SEAL's
father, William
Owens, refused to meet with the
president
when his son's remains were
flown home.
Instead, he told The Miami
Herald that Mr.
Trump shouldn't -- quote --
"hide behind his
son's death to prevent an
investigation."
The president again deflected
criticism in
an interview aired yesterday on
FOX News,
saying he followed the
military's advice.
DONALD TRUMP: This was a mission
that was
started before I got here.
They explained what they wanted
to do, the
generals, who are very
respected.
And they lost Ryan.
MARGARET WARNER: Today, South
Carolina Republican
Lindsey Graham offered this
advice:
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: Don't
oversell results.
The only sin I think a commander
in chief
can make is exaggerating
successes and not
understanding the challenges.
MARGARET WARNER: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And joining me
now from the
White House, Sebastian Gorka.
He is deputy assistant to the
president.
He advises the administration on
national
security issues.
Mr. Gorka, thank you for being
with us.
Picking up on what we heard from
senator Graham,
did the president fully
understand the challenges
involved when he signed off on
this?
SEBASTIAN GORKA, Deputy
Assistant to President
Trump: Of course he did.
He's the commander in chief.
He takes his job very, very
seriously.
If you look at the way he's
treated law enforcement,
if you look at the way he's
treated the military,
this is a man who fully
understands the burden
of leadership and the
responsibility he has
as the commander in chief.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, he
suggested in that
interview with FOX News
yesterday that he
did it mainly because the
generals suggested
that he do it, that they
recommended it.
Is that the case?
SEBASTIAN GORKA: We don't give
our internal
playbook away.
That's what the last
administration did.
That's how people get in big,
big trouble.
These are classified operations
by our tier
one operators.
So, he acted and made a decision
based upon
the best advice of our military.
That's the way it has to work,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, my question
is, Mr. Gorka,
because we just -- again,
looking at that
FOX interview, referring to the
generals,
the president said, "They lost
Ryan."
Does that mean he doesn't accept
responsibility?
SEBASTIAN GORKA: Of course it
doesn't.
And I find it quite churlish
when the media
focuses on half a sentence here,
half a sentence
there.
Why would you even posit that of
the president?
It's really unbecoming.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the president
accepts,
in effect, the buck stops with
him?
SEBASTIAN GORKA: Of course he
does.
He's the president.
This is a team effort,
nevertheless.
Nobody goes into battle alone,
but he is the
commander in chief.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We also heard the
president
say that the raid was highly
successful, that
it generated a large amount of
intelligence
that will be valuable, useful
for the administration.
But we also know that there are
a number of
news organization reporting that
senior officials
saying that is not the case,
that there is
not valuable intelligence from
that raid.
What are we to believe?
SEBASTIAN GORKA: Is that the
same kind of
sources that reported all kinds
of fallacious
things inside the White House?
The sad truth is, Judy, since I
started working
here six weeks ago, I find that
more than
50 percent of the more
sensational things
I read are wholly fallacious and
unfounded.
I can tell you because I'm
inside the building
when those decisions are being
taken.
So, it's easy to make up unnamed
sources,
but the fact is life is a little
different
from what you would read in the
mainstream
media inside the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you say
to the American
people who are asking, why is
the U.S. in
Yemen in the first place?
SEBASTIAN GORKA: Oh, very easy,
very, very
easy.
As the president pointed out
yesterday, we
are facing a global threat.
It is radical Islamic terrorism.
Another great synonym is the
global jihadi
movement.
And the idea that Yemen or
another country
that doesn't have adequate
governance is not
potentially connected to the
threat to the
United States is, again, a very,
very dangerous
concept.
These aren't just events
occurring 8,000 or
10,000 miles away.
Remember, Omar Mateen, as he
slayed 49 Americans
in the Pulse nightclub, stopped
to dial 911,
not to call an ambulance, Judy,
but to swear
allegiance to Abu Bakr
al-Baghdadi in the
Middle East.
That's just how interconnected
the threat
is today and how real the war is
from the
streets of Aleppo right to
Orlando.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I want to
pick up on
the phrase you just used,
radical Islamic
terrorism.
We heard the president say that
last night.
But it has also been reported,
as you know,
several news organizations, that
the president's
new security adviser, General
H.R. McMaster,
has advised the president not to
use that
term, in effect because it
suggests that all
who believe in Islam as a faith,
that there's
some strain there that's
connected to terrorism.
SEBASTIAN GORKA: How does it --
A, the reports
are, again, false.
It's fake news.
Not true.
You need to talk to General
McMaster, who
I talked to yesterday before the
speech.
It's not what he said.
And, again, how does the phrase
radical Islamic
terrorism link all the believers
of a faith
to terrorism?
If I said radical Christian
terrorism, does
that mean I as a Catholic are a
terrorist?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, I'm just
trying to understand.
So you're saying the president
is not suggesting
that there is something inherent
in all of
Islam that is at odds with
Western values?
SEBASTIAN GORKA: That would be
asinine.
Of course he didn't.
We are dealing with a version of
Islam, with
criminals, mass murderers,
people who run
slave markets, that use a
religion, use a
seventh century, atavistic,
blood-curdled
version of it to justify their
actions.
But I can tell you, the idea
that you can
separate jihadi terrorism from
Islam is exactly
what got us in the mess we are
today, with
65 million refugees around the
world and with
ISIS controlling territory in
multiple countries.
If you talk to Muslims, as I do
-- I have
trained hundreds of Muslim
officers from our
partner nations when I was in
the Defense
Department -- they will tell
you, Judy, this
is a war inside Islam for the
heart of Islam.
We are not at war with Islam.
That is a very dangerous and
very fallacious
idea.
But we know that our Muslim
allies are fighting
a war for the heart of Islam.
Ask the Jordanians.
Ask the Egyptians.
They understand the relevance of
jihadist
ideology in this war.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sebastian Gorka,
who is a deputy
assistant to President Trump, we
thank you
very much.
SEBASTIAN GORKA: My pleasure.
Any time, Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now views on
the raid in
Yemen and the decision-making
behind it.
We talk to two men with intimate
knowledge
of the process that authorized
the use of
military force during the Obama
administration.
Colin Kahl was deputy assistant
to the president
and national security adviser to
the vice
president during the Obama
administration.
He is now an associate professor
at Georgetown
University.
Andrew Exum was deputy assistant
secretary
of defense for Middle East
policy during the
Obama administration.
He also served in the Army form
2000 to 2004
in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Colin, let me start with you.
We have heard the president say,
this was
a mission that was started
before I got here.
You were in the rooms where
these mission
have been discussed for the
Obama administration
before he left.
What did the previous
administration leave
for President Trump to pick up?
COLIN KAHL, Former Deputy
Assistant to President
Obama: Yes.
Well, for years, the United
States has been
taking military action against
this group,
AQAP, al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula, al
Qaeda's affiliate in Yemen,
predominantly
through drone strikes,
airstrikes.
What came to the White House
shortly before
Christmas was a proposal from
the Pentagon
to expand the authorities and
resources to
allow special operations forces
to more actively
engage in direct raids to go
after compounds,
like the one that we saw in
January.
But a couple of things, I think,
are important
to note.
First, they never briefed a
particular raid.
They didn't say, we're going to
go after a
particular target or a compound
on this night
or this day.
Instead, they asked for a broad
set of authorities
to do this type of thing.
And, importantly, when the
deputies convened,
kind of a sub-cabinet level of
government
convened in early January, they
recommended
that this decision get deferred
to the Trump
administration, so they could
run their own
careful process.
And President Obama agreed on
that, that he
would make no decision whether
to do things
like this, and instead that
Trump should run
his own process.
But, instead, Trump had a dinner
party and
decided it over dinner.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, you're
saying the category
of raids was what was discussed,
not this
specific raid, because we saw
reports that
perhaps they were waiting for a
moonless night,
that was the opportune time, it
couldn't have
happened in the Obama
administration's last
few days.
MD-BO /COLIN KAHL: I will defer
to Andrew,
who worked in the Pentagon, on
this one.
But my understanding is that
there were a
number of concepts of operations
that were
bouncing around the Pentagon for
a long time,
and this raid may have been one
of them.
It was never brought across the
river to the
White House.
And as it relates to the
moonless night issue,
a Pentagon spokesperson said
that that issue
didn't become relevant until
after January
20, when they then asked for the
authority
to do the raid to Trump.
And, importantly, that's why I
think it's
extraordinarily unfair to our
men and women
in the armed services for Trump
to suggest,
as he did on FOX yesterday, that
somehow this
is the military's fault.
He's the commander in chief.
The buck stops with him.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Andrew Exum,
fill in that
blank there.
From the Pentagon's perspective,
what was
left for the Trump
administration?
ANDREW EXUM, Former U.S. Deputy
Assistant
Secretary of Defense: Well, no,
I think that
that's an accurate recounting of
the way that
things were presented to the
Trump administration
and to the Obama administration
before the
-- before the Trump
inauguration.
I think that we in the Obama
administration,
those are of us who served in
the Obama administration
need to be very careful as we
criticize the
process that the Trump
administration used
to approve this.
First off, to approve this raid,
it would
have gone through several
hurdles just through
the Department of Defense before
being presented
to the president.
When we in the Obama
administration brought
these options to the president,
it followed
a very deliberate interagency
process.
It's what worked for President
Obama.
Just because we have seen, quite
frankly,
a lot of a -- lot of mess in the
Trump administration
thus far in their first month, I
think we
have got to be careful about
saying that we
had all the answers during the
Obama administration.
I think Colin would agree with
that.
This president's going find a
decision-making
process that works for him.
What happened in Yemen may cause
him to rethink
the way in which he approved
this raid, because
you can always delegate
authority.
You can never delegate the risk.
Ultimately, you're going to own
that, as Dr.
Gorka mentioned from the White
House.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Andrew, I want
to -- you
recently wrote that blaming the
president
is both inappropriate and
counterproductive.
You also described sometimes
that the process
can be paralysis by analysis.
ANDREW EXUM: Yes.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That it can
take a very
long time.
ANDREW EXUM: No, that's right.
Colin remembers that, at one
point in the
waning days of the Obama
administration, I
think we were debating at the
Cabinet level
the movement of three
helicopters from Iraq
to Syria.
Now, there are obvious, you
know, political
implications of anything you do
on the ground.
But at what point do you
delegate authority
down to your commander on the
ground, I think,
is the key question.
The reason why I think putting
the -- putting
real blame on the Trump
administration here
is dangerous is because you have
the Benghazi
effect.
You remember, when the
Republicans used Benghazi
and what happened there as a
cudgel to beat
Hillary Clinton, and without --
you know their
effort was successful, it must
be added, to
weaken her as a political
candidate.
But it also had a chilling
effect on the bureaucracy.
It makes the bureaucracy
risk-averse.
And, quite frankly, that's not
something that
we want from our diplomats.
It's not something we want from
our special
operators.
We want them to be aggressive.
We want them to take risks.
And when we elevate the blame,
when something
goes wrong, all the way to the
presidential
level, we just have got to be
very careful
about how we do that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, Colin,
why does it
take so long?
What kinds of input factor into
a decision
like this?
MD-BO /COLIN KAHL: Yes, look, I
think that
the Obama administration can be
criticized
for too much micromanagement of
the Pentagon.
I think, you know, the question
is, did they
swing the pendulum too far in
one direction?
But I worry that President
Trump, in the first
big decision that came to his,
in this case,
dinner table as commander in
chief, he swung
the pendulum all the way back in
the other
direction.
Look, what President Obama
insisted on is,
every time that the military
wanted to come
forward to ask for authority to
significantly
escalate, especially to put
ground forces
into a conflict environment,
where people
can die, both our service
members, but also
civilians and others, that we
needed to have
a careful, deliberate process.
It doesn't have to take weeks.
It oftentimes takes a couple of
days.
But it works its way through,
and you get
the inputs from all the various
agencies.
The question I have with Trump's
decision-making
process here is not that you
have to do it
exactly the way we did it, but
he didn't run
a process at all.
He just had dinner with
Secretary Mattis and
General Dunford and a handful of
close advisers
and was briefed about the raid
and made a
decision.
And, as a consequence, he didn't
have the
full benefit of his intelligence
professionals,
of his State Department.
And that is a recipe for making
mistakes and
costing people their lives.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Andrew Exum,
what about
the idea that, when there are
these different
agencies, these different people
weighing
in on it, that they're going to
think about
diplomatic consequences,
political consequences,
things that perhaps a commander
in the field
might not think about because,
for him or
her, they see a much different
objective?
ANDREW EXUM: Yes, it's a valid
point.
I think the way Colin described
things, I
think he's right that the
pendulum swung back.
I wouldn't say it went all the
way back, because,
again, the decision-making
process in this
raid would have gone through a
very rigorous
process in the Pentagon.
It would have been blessed off
by all the
Pentagon senior leaders before
it would have
been presented to the president.
So it wasn't completely without
rigor.
But I think what Colin is
describing in terms
of baking down the risk, that
does happen
in a deliberate process like
that.
The key question is opportunity
cost.
So, in the Obama administration,
we had a
very deliberate process that in
many cases
served the president and was
what the president
desired.
It drew down a lot of political
risks, as
well as the physical risk, to
the operators
on the ground.
The question is, was there an
opportunity
cost?
The nature of these raids is,
they go after
time-sensitive targets.
So do you lose opportunities the
more that
you hold things up in
Washington?
I think that's the key question.
And where Colin and I may
disagree, but where
I think we do agree, is that
there has to
be a balance.
It's just a matter of where you
strike that
balance.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Andrew Exum,
Colin Kahl, thank you both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
successes
and struggles of two of the
world's fastest
growing businesses; and a plan
to once again
send humans to the moon.
But first: the nation's opioid
crisis.
Overdose deaths are on the rise
across the
country, in 2015, surpassing gun
homicides
for the first time.
One of the hardest-hit states is
Maryland,
where the governor today
declared a state
of emergency to fight the
epidemic.
But, for more than a year, the
city of Baltimore
has been training everyday
citizens in how
to use a lifesaving antidote, an
approach
that's catching on across the
country.
"NewsHour" producer Pamela
Kirkland visited
Baltimore to find out more.
MAN: Excuse me, sir, are you
interested in
Narcan training?
PAMELA KIRKLAND: Each week, city
health workers
hit the streets of Baltimore,
handing out
an emergency medication that
brings users
back from the dead.
MAN: This is the medicine.
It reverses overdoses.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: Naloxone, brand
name Narcan,
comes as a nasal spray or
injection, and works
by blocking the brain's opioid
receptors.
In a city with 24,000 active
heroin users,
overdoses, and now increasingly
this emergency
antidote have become facts of
life.
MAN: I lost a friend of mine
that was -- at
25 years old.
MAN: I have just seen so many
young people
getting hooked on the opioids,
or better yet,
the fentanyl.
And it's definitely a killer,
PAMELA KIRKLAND: In Maryland,
deaths from
opioids, which include heroin,
fentanyl and
prescription painkillers,
doubled between
2010 and 2015, to just under
1,100 people
a year.
Meanwhile, heroin fatalities
alone more than
tripled.
And in just the past three
years, deaths in
Baltimore from fentanyl, a
synthetic opioid
far stronger than heroin, are up
20-fold.
DR.
LEANA WEN, Baltimore Health
Commissioner:
We have an epidemic of people,
fellow residents
in our city, who are dying from
opioid overdose.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: In late 2015,
Dr. Leana Wen,
Baltimore's health commissioner,
and a practicing
emergency room physician, issued
a standing
order for naloxone to all
620,000 city residents.
DR.
LEANA WEN: What that means is
that, if somebody
goes through a very basic
training -- and
we do trainings everywhere,
including on street
corners, in jails, in public
housing, really
anywhere that people are -- they
will immediately
get a prescription for naloxone,
and even
get the medication in hand.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: Just one dose
of naloxone
can bring someone back.
Residents can buy it at a
pharmacy, only $1
for Medicaid recipients.
And thanks to a 2015 good
samaritan law, there's
no risk of prosecution if
citizens intervene
and the victim dies.
MAN: I have used it four times.
I keep them in my bag.
I always keep them in my bag, at
least four
or five of them in my bag.
JOHN HARRIS, Baltimore Health
Department:
This is our mobile unit.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: John Harris
works on one
of the Health Department's vans
which traverse
the city offering sexually
transmitted infection
screenings, clean needle kits
and naloxone
training.
JOHN HARRIS: Well, we tell
people that, once
you reverse an overdose, then
not to use that.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: He knows what
addiction can
do to a person, having spent 16
years addicted
to heroin.
But he sees something different
today.
JOHN HARRIS: There was a lot of
fentanyl at
first that we were hearing
about.
But now the clients are starting
to come with
medications that they use on an
elephant,
tranquilizers being cut with
heroin.
There are benzodiazepines.
We're hearing about all
different types of
drugs.
It's really becoming more
complicated and
dangerous.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: Since January
2015, the Baltimore
Health Department says over
20,000 residents
have completed naloxone training
and at least
800 lives have been saved.
And many more states and
municipalities across
the country have moved to make
naloxone more
accessible to the public.
But not everyone believes this
is the right
approach.
MIKE GIMBEL, Maryland Addiction
Recovery Center:
We are selling it to the public
as if it's
the answer.
I mean, it's an amazing drug, no
doubt about
it, but it doesn't change the
behavior of
the addict.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: For 25 years,
Mike Gimbel
was Baltimore County's director
of substance
abuse.
Now he's a consultant for
Maryland Addiction
Recovery Center, a private
treatment facility
outside the city.
And like John Harris, Gimbel is
in recovery.
MIKE GIMBEL: Heroin is the
devil.
It's the devil.
It makes you do things you would
never do
you in your life.
It took a middle-class, good
Jewish kid like
me, and had me robing my own
parents, carrying
a gun.
That's what heroin does.
That's how powerful heroin is.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: He argues that
the city and
state are spending too much time
and money
on Narcan training and outreach,
and not enough
on long-term recovery.
And as a sign this approach
isn't working,
he points to the city's rising
overdose fatalities,
up 68 percent for the first
three-quarters
of 2016 over the same period the
year before.
MIKE GIMBEL: Sometimes, by
having Narcan so
available, it actually
reinforces the addict's
behavior.
Why should I stop using heroin,
when, if I
overdose, Narcan's going to save
my life?
Where's the motivation to stop?
It's not there.
So, sometimes, yes -- and we
don't want to
see people die, but, sometimes,
watching someone
die and watching what happens
with overdose
and death wakes up a lot of
addicts.
TIMMY HALL, Former Baltimore
Police Officer:
It's just a first-responder
tool.
That's all it is.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: Timmy Hall was
with the Baltimore
Police Department for 24 years,
where he routinely
saw opioid overdoses.
He says officers often use
Narcan to revive
the same drug users over and
over again.
TIMMY HALL: A lot of times, they
get upset
with you when you bring them
back, because
they feel like you wasted the
money they spent.
You know, that's the feeling
that they wanted.
That wanted that feeling, and
you took it
away from them.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: But Hall
doesn't see an alternative.
TIMMY HALL: As a police officer,
your first
job is to protect and serve, you
know?
And what officer would want to
sit there and
watch somebody die, if they got
the tools
to save somebody?
So, Narcan, to me, is a great
tool.
It's just a first-responder
PAMELA KIRKLAND: The Health
Department attributes
the continued rise in overdoses
and fatalities
to a rise in far more powerful
drugs hitting
the streets.
Dr. Wen says there's no evidence
that denying
naloxone to overdose victims
helps users end
their addictions.
Naloxone is just one tool in
this fight.
DR.
LEANA WEN: We are just treading
water if all
we're doing is saving someone's
life right
now.
We also know that we have to get
them the
second part, which is access to
long-term
treatments, that it's a
combination of medications
and some treatments,
psychosocial treatments,
like counseling.
And then other services are
important too,
including housing.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: Of course,
those all cost
money and political will.
GOV.
LARRY HOGAN (R), Maryland:
Heroin and opioid
abuse has been taking lives and
tearing apart
families.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: Just today,
Maryland's Republican
governor, Larry Hogan, announced
a state of
emergency to deal with the
crisis, pledging
50 million additional dollars
over five years
for enforcement, treatment and
prevention.
JOHN HARRIS: It's got to get
better.
It's got to get better.
And I believe it will get
better.
I don't think perfection exists
in anything,
but I do believe Baltimore has
done a lot
of good work, will do some more
good work,
because we are saving lives.
PAMELA KIRKLAND: Saving some
lives amid a
growing epidemic.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Pamela Kirkland
in Baltimore.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now: two
high-flying companies
whose value has soared and are
the subject
of intense scrutiny, Uber, and
the parent
company of Snapchat.
For Uber, it's about the culture
and leadership
of the ride-hailing service,
valued at nearly
$70 billion.
It's back in the spotlight
following release
of a video of its CEO berating
an Uber driver.
More on that in a moment.
But, first, Snapchat is about to
sell its
stock to the public for the
first time.
The parent company announced it
will offer
its share at $17 a share,
bringing its value
to nearly $24 billion.
The messaging app is used by
nearly 160 million
people each day, and is
especially popular
among teens and young adults.
But there are big questions
about whether
it's worth this kind of value.
Mike Isaac is covering both
these stories
for The New York Times.
He joins me now.
Let's start with Snapchat.
What is the value that Snapchat
is trying
to sell investors?
MIKE ISAAC, The New York Times:
Yes.
So, Snapchat's big story is,
it's going to
be its next Facebook and not the
next Twitter,
essentially.
One of Twitter's big struggles,
if you remember,
when it went public a few years
ago, is, it
sort of failed to grow fast
enough for investors
on Wall Street.
And so, as far as Facebook is
concerned, their
growth was huge, but Snapchat
just wants to
say, like, look, this is the
next big social
network.
You want to get in as quickly as
possible
on the ground floor of this IPO,
and we're
going to have the success and
strength and
reach of Facebook, particularly
with younger
users.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How does it
plan to make
money?
At one point, it calls itself
now a camera
company.
So, is it a social network?
Is it a camera company?
Do they make money selling
advertisements?
MIKE ISAAC: Yes, so it's
primarily advertisements.
They have little what they call
Snapchat stories.
And publications like The New
York Times will
show different things inside of
their -- usually
video and photo-based.
And then they sell ads against
that.
And then they're kind of
experimenting with
other things, whether it's like
e-commerce-related
things inside the app.
And then who knows?
They have what are called
Snapchat Spectacles,
which are glasses on your face,
and maybe
they can make money from that.
I'm not really sure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And so part of
the reason
that it looks like Wall Street
is excited
is because there hasn't been a
big tech IPO
in a while.
MIKE ISAAC: Yes, that's right.
I think a lot of investors feel
like they
missed out on Facebook a few
years ago, especially
when the IPO went really
terribly for the
company, and now Facebook is
trading at over
$100 a share.
So I think everyone is really
looking forward
to a successful IPO from a tech
company.
And it has been a bit.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And these two
founders have
also decided to take a lot of
the -- I guess
the voting control of the
company.
This seems to be the new thing.
Mark Zuckerberg has a tremendous
amount of
control over his company.
Is this the kind of template
that now tech
CEOs want?
MIKE ISAAC: I think so.
And I think investors kind of
have a sense
of trust that the founders tend
to know best
and what's best for their
company.
Mark Zuckerberg really sort of
became the
pioneer or advocate for this
approach, where,
you know, he doesn't really want
to hear much
of what investors have to say
about how he
should run his company.
And investors are comfortable
with that because
he tends to be running it really
well, and
it keeps growing, and it keeps
making them
tons of money.
So that might work.
(CROSSTALK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sorry.
Let's shift gears then to Uber.
It's been in the news recently
after a former
employee wrote on her personal
blog that she
had been sexually harassed at
the company
and that it was covered up.
Yesterday, Bloomberg released a
video of Uber
CEO Travis Kalanick in a heated
exchange with
an Uber driver over lowering
fares for its
black cars service.
The argument took place in
February.
MAN: You changed the whole
business.
TRAVIS KALANICK, CEO, Uber:
What?
MAN: You dropped the prices.
TRAVIS KALANICK: On black.
MAN: Yes, you did.
(CROSSTALK)
MAN: We started with $20.
We started with $20.
How much is the mile now, $2.75?
TRAVIS KALANICK: You know what?
MAN: What?
TRAVIS KALANICK: Some people
don't like to
take responsibility for their...
(CROSSTALK)
TRAVIS KALANICK: They blame
everything in
their life on somebody else.
(CROSSTALK)
TRAVIS KALANICK: Good luck.
MAN: Good luck to you, too.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Kalanick later
apologized.
He said in a statement: "It's
clear this video
is a reflection of me, and the
criticism we
have received is a stark
reminder that I must
fundamentally change as a leader
and grow
up."
That's part of the statement.
So, Mike, why is this apology to
the driver
and the company so important?
MIKE ISAAC: If you followed the
company for
the past seven years, one thing
you can say
about Travis Kalanick, he's
pretty unapologetic.
He's aggressive.
He's pushed into markets where
operating Uber
was actually illegal.
And it's been a real
no-holds-barred approach
to operating a company.
So, to see him say, I have to be
humble, I
have to change the type of
leader that I am
is a real big shift for them.
And I'm really curious if he can
actually
do it at this point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And this is
also a company
that is not public yet, but when
it goes,
if it goes, the valuations are
staggering
-- $70 billion is currently
where it's at.
Does this call into question
perhaps the temperament
of this individual and whether
he is the right
person to run such a big global
company?
MIKE ISAAC: Yes, I think that's
right.
Almost a $70 billion valuation,
I think investors,
as well as employees, are
wondering, we had
this CEO who got us through the
really tough
early phases.
Can this person lead us through
an IPO, where
people really want a more even
keel?
And I think everyone is still
asking that
question, but it's not really
clear at this
point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This is in the
wake of the
revelations of a woman who left
the company,
and she had this -- part of this
to say in
her blog.
"It became obvious that both
H.R. and management
had been lying about this being
his first
offense, and it certainly wasn't
his last.
The situation was escalated as
far up the
chain as it could be escalated,
and still
nothing was done."
She's not talking about Travis.
She's talking about one of her
managers who
she contends was harassing to
her, and now
there's a large investigation.
This is a big deal for the
company.
MIKE ISAAC: Yes, this is -- you
know, this
is core to how the culture
operates.
You know, it's very -- to take
it from Facebook,
move fast and break things.
But, at some point, you have to
sort of clean
things up on the inside and
change, especially
if you want to go public.
And I think they're really
facing that question
right now.
It's just a question of, can you
do it and
how long will it take?
HARI SREENIVASAN: For a little
while, there
was -- and there might still be
continuing
-- a delete Uber campaign.
Did that have an impact on their
business?
MIKE ISAAC: Yes, it did.
It was -- I would say it's not a
material
financial impact, but I have
spoken to a number
of people who were watching that
go down inside.
And, you know, there were
hundreds of thousands
of people that deleted their
Uber accounts
entirely, and probably hundreds
of thousands
more that just deleted the app.
So, it worried Uber, and they
definitely tried
to curb it pretty quickly.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Mike Isaac of
The New York Times, thanks so
much.
MIKE ISAAC: Thanks for having
me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to our
Leading edge
segment for this week: a
potential return
to the moon.
Near the end of his address last
night, the
president made a reference to
space travel,
saying -- quote -- "American
footprints on
distant worlds are not too big a
dream."
It was only a line.
But whenever a president speaks
on the subject,
the space community is closely
trying to read
the tea leaves.
The sentence leaves a lot to
interpretation,
but all signs seem to indicate
there is renewed
focus inside the Trump
administration, NASA
and the private sector on travel
to the moon,
sooner than you might think.
Our science correspondent, Miles
O'Brien,
is here.
So, Miles, why the moon after
all these years?
MILES O'BRIEN: Aside from the
"because it's
there" answer, it's actually a
good destination
to go and learn about living and
working on
an encampment in space.
You know, we went to the moon 50
years ago
now.
We left some footprints and
flags behind,
but we didn't really learn how
to live there
on a sustained basis.
So, while NASA would still like
to go to Mars,
there's a lot of things you can
learn about
by setting up an encampment on
the moon.
And we have learned in the past
50 years there's
a lot of water ice on the moon.
What is water?
Hydrogen and oxygen.
What is rocket fuel?
So you can learn a lot about how
to create
rocket fuel on location and
perhaps push deeper
into space.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So this didn't
just spring
up as an idea because they
couldn't think
of anything else?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, there was
one other factor.
There was a mission planned at
the end of
'18 for the Space Launch System,
which is
the next heavy lift that NASA is
working -- heavy
lift rocket.
One piece of it wasn't going to
be ready,
built by the Europeans, a
service module.
And so NASA was faced with the
possibility
of delaying that mission, an
unmanned mission,
even later, or maybe doing
something like
we did with Apollo 8, something
bold.
In the case of Apollo 8, the
lunar module
wasn't ready.
And we decided to go around the
moon.
In this case, they're thinking
about putting
astronauts on this flight maybe
early '19,
and send them around the moon
Apollo 8-style.
So, a lot of things have lined
up.
And, all of a sudden, there is
wide agreement
in the space community, this
might be the
next step.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you were
telling me, Miles,
there's a private sector piece
in all of this,
Elon Musk announcing just the
other day that
two individuals, I guess, with
some extra
spending money...
MILES O'BRIEN: To say the least.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... have told him
they want
to go around the moon and come
back to Earth.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes.
He got a lot of attention for
that.
He doesn't have a rocket to do
it yet.
It's just a design right now.
It's called the Falcon Heavy,
which would
have almost the thrust of the
mighty Saturn
5 of Apollo days.
It will fly for the first time,
he hopes,
by the summer.
So saying there are going to be
paying passengers
on there by '18 is optimistic,
for sure.
So, we will watch that with
skepticism.
But to the extent that the
private sector
and the government space
enterprise sort of
push each other toward this
destination, a
lot of space people are pretty
excited about
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, remind us,
Miles, why
was the moon -- it was on the
agenda at NASA
for a while, but it came off.
What was that all about?
MILES O'BRIEN: Politics.
Of course, we lost the shuttle
Columbia in
'03.
President Bush at the time
canceled the shuttle
program and said, let's go back
to the moon,
a program called Constellation.
That got some traction.
And then, of course, President
Obama came
in and said, we're not going to
the moon.
We're going to Mars.
And he wouldn't let anybody talk
about going
to the moon.
There were a lot of people who
said, you know,
we should try the moon first
before we move
onto Mars, but that got shelved
during the
Obama administration.
Politics now is different,
obviously, with
the Trump administration there.
And I'm told the Trump
administration would
really like to have U.S.
astronauts taking
off from a U.S. spaceport some
time in its
first term.
And so this idea of turning that
unmanned
Space Launch System flight into
a crewed mission
is gaining a lot of traction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally,
Miles, there
is this question of money.
It costs money to go into space.
This is a president who has
talked about cutting
back domestic discretionary
spending.
Where's the money going to come
from?
MILES O'BRIEN: You know, it's
interesting.
You have to look at the entire
space enterprise
here.
NASA's budget is a little more
than $19 billion,
but if you look at the budget
for the military
side of space, it's about $40
billion.
So, what if they reconsider this
idea of a
space council, which they're
doing, headed
by the vice president, and they
start looking
at ways to carve out and
eliminate some of
the redundancies between the
military and
the civilian side?
There may be some ways, even
with NASA cuts,
that they can borrow from each
other, feed
each other technology, as it
were, military
and civilian, which could be a
bit of a force
multiplier and could make it
still possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Interesting,
because the president
has talked about spending a lot
more money
on defense.
MILES O'BRIEN: Exactly.
So, that money might ultimately
help NASA.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Miles O'Brien,
taking us to
the moon and back, thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: To the moon,
Alice.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Aboriginal Australian art
is the oldest
continuous art tradition in the
world, stretching
back more than 40,000 years.
Now, due to a group of
passionate collectors
and curators, Aboriginal
Australian art shows
are popping up across the U.S.
You can take a closer look and
find more on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And we have lost another of the
greats in
public broadcasting.
Longtime "Nightly Business
Report" co-anchor
Paul Kangas passed away
yesterday at the age
of 79 in Miami.
Paul retired from the program in
2009.
In an earlier era, The Detroit
Free Press
dubbed Paul the Walter Cronkite
of business
broadcasting.
And we all remember his
trademark sign-off,
"Wishing you the best of good
buys."
Paul was a true gentleman with a
great sense
of humor.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight.
On Thursday, our Making Sense
team looks at
the unique corporate culture
behind the e-tailing
giant Zappos.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.